porting justin's edits into GH (#253)
jaybee84/ml-in-rd: content/08.outlook.md

This information, not readily available to non-experts, was obvious to the clinician.
Such instances suggest that collaboration with domain experts and sharing of well-annotated data is needed to generate robust datasets.

In addition to sample scarcity, comprehensive phenotypic-genotypic databases are also lacking.
While rare disease studies that collect genomic and phenotypic data are becoming more common [@doi:10.1038/nrg3555; @doi:10.1038/nrg.2017.116; @doi:10.1056/NEJMra1711801], developing comprehensive genomics-based genotype-phenotype databases that prioritize clinical and genomics data standards is key to fueling interpretation of ML methods.
This method can be bolstered by funding or fostering collaboration between biobanking projects and patient registry initiatives.
Mindful sharing of data with proper metadata and attribution enabling prompt data reuse is important in building valuable datasets for rare disease research [@https://www.nature.com/articles/s41576-020-0257-5].

> Finally, federated learning methods, such as those used in mobile health [@doi:10.1038/s41746-020-00323-1] and electronic healthcare records studies [@doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.24946], may allow researchers to develop ML models on data from larger numbers of people with rare diseases whilst protecting patient privacy.

Author: Re: line 29

Justin: The paragraphs that follow this heading don’t really reflect this heading, i.e. don’t focus on mechanistic understanding.

Author: Re: line 33 `can handle constraints of rare disease data`

Justin: this is not clear

While rare disease studies that collect genomic and phenotypic data are becoming more common [@doi:10.1038/nrg3555; @doi:10.1038/nrg.2017.116; @doi:10.1056/NEJMra1711801], developing comprehensive genomics-based genotype-phenotype databases that prioritize clinical and genomics data standards is key to fueling interpretation of ML methods.
This method can be bolstered by funding or fostering collaboration between biobanking projects and patient registry initiatives.
Mindful sharing of data with proper metadata and attribution enabling prompt data reuse is important in building valuable datasets for rare disease research [@https://www.nature.com/articles/s41576-020-0257-5].
Finally, federated learning methods, such as those used in mobile health [@doi:10.1038/s41746-020-00323-1] and electronic healthcare records studies [@doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.24946], may allow researchers to develop ML models on data from larger numbers of people with rare diseases whilst protecting patient privacy.

### Methods that reliably support mechanistic interrogation of specific rare diseases are an unmet need

Most ML methods for rare diseases are used for classification tasks.

> Not many methods investigate biological mechanisms; this is likely due to a lack of methods that can handle the limitations of rare disease data described throughout this perspective.

Reviewer: Is the main point here that the methods you might use to interrogate mechanism require large sample sizes or are there other considerations as well? If just the former, you might make it explicit.

Author: This refers to sample size + sparsity + label-noise

Developing methods to address this will be critical for applying ML to rare disease data.

> For example, development of methods with a focus on explainability of the model can ensure that the features used in a model can also be interrogated to understand mechanism of the disease. [@doi:10.1038/s41551-018-0304-0]

Author: ```suggestion
For example, development of methods with a focus on explainability of the model can identify features that may be related to the underlying disease mechanism.[@doi:10.1038/s41551-018-0304-0]
Alternatively, representation learning or regularization methods may help identify multiple correlated features which can be interrogated to identify biologically meaningful pathways.
```

Additionally, robust _error analysis_ for newly developed models to help users understand how a feature influences the performance of a model can provide insight into its potential contribution to the underlying disease mechanism. [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bth060]

> Interrogating disease mechanisms by adopting modifications of these approaches is necessary as ML applications become mainstream in research and clinical settings.

Reviewer: These are good improvements re: responding to the comment. 

One thing I'll add, and I'm not sure it belongs here – if I want to learn about disease mechanism, I'm not necessarily going to design an experiment such that I'm trying to distinguish classes in the first place. (I believe these references are all related to classification task, but I could be wrong!)

Features that are informative re: prediction are not _necessarily_ going to tell me about disease mechanism. In fact, sometimes you pick models that are going to pick one feature out of many correlated features (e.g., LASSO) and maybe you'd be better off examining the coordinated patterns in the first place to get something "biologically meaningful."

Author: > Features that are informative re: prediction are not necessarily going to tell me about disease mechanism. In fact, sometimes you pick models that are going to pick one feature out of many correlated features (e.g., LASSO) and maybe you'd be better off examining the coordinated patterns in the first place to get something "biologically meaningful."

Agree, actually the citation for explainability (above) partly addresses this.

Reviewer: I would consider whether or not the audience – readers are unlikely to have read or have working knowledge of the reference – are likely to get this message from what is in the text here _and_ if it's important to you that the audience gets this message.
